README.md, before:


<!-- generated by R package codedoc; do not modify! -->

# Package `vame`


`vame` makes it simpler to define and make use of metadata pertaining
to one more variables (e.g. a tabular dataset). It implements the
`VariableMetadata` class, which contains the metadata. The various metadata
are accessed using slot functions such as `vm@var_description_get`.

The `VariableMetadata` class is intended for storing metadata for which there
is "one right way". For instance, a variable has one correct description in
text. This philosophy excludes tasks such as creating a manual for a dataset,
which can take many forms.

<!-- badges: start -->
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/FinnishCancerRegistry/vame/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/FinnishCancerRegistry/vame/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
<!-- badges: end -->

# Recommended installation

```r
devtools::install_github(
  "FinnishCancerRegistry/vame",
  ref = readline("enter latest tag on github: ")
)
```

# Example of use

Suppose you have a tabular dataset. You have ID columns, stratifying columns
(e.g. demographical data), dates, what have you. `vame` makes it easy to
define what kind of data each column contains. For instance you can define
the precise set of category values that a categorical column can have.
Further, this package makes quick work of writing assertions on columns
or entire datasets, of producing stratum tables for the purpose of computing
statistics within each stratum, and retrieving labels for (e.g.
integer-valued) categorical variables.

Consider the following tiny dataset of child patients.

```r
dt <- data.table::data.table(
  subject_id = 1:3,
  birth_date = as.Date(c("2001-01-01", "2002-01-01", "2003-01-01")),
  dg_age = c(10.5, 15.2, 20.0),
  dg_age_group = 3:5,
  ex_age = c(21.0, 20.0, 19.0),
  ex_age_group = c(5L, 4L, 4L),
  social_class = c(0L, 0L, 1L)
)

# "type" is up to you. you may want to write code that takes type into account.
# however, type "categorical" is special: stratum tables and labels can
# be retrieved for categorical columns only.
age_group_labels <- data.table::data.table(
  value = 1:18,
  label = paste0(0:17 * 5, "-", c(1:17 * 5 - 1, 120))
)
var_dt <- data.table::data.table(
  var_nm = c("subject_id", "birth_date",
             "dg_age", "dg_age_group",
             "ex_age", "ex_age_group",
             "social_class"),
  class_set = list(
    "integer", "Date",
    "numeric", "integer",
    "numeric", "integer",
    "integer"
  ),
  type = c("id", "date",
            "duration", "categorical",
            "duration", "categorical",
            "categorical"),
  label_set = list(
    NULL, NULL,
    NULL, age_group_labels,
    NULL, age_group_labels,
    data.table::data.table(
      value = 0:3,
      label = c("student", "labourer", "professional", "entrepreneur")
    )
  )
)

age_bounds <- list(
  lo = 0.0, hi = 120.0,
  lo_inclusive = TRUE, hi_inclusive = FALSE
)
value_spaces <- list(
  # element names such as subject_id, birth_date not necessary ---
  # I used them for readability.
  subject_id = list(
    bounds = list(
      lo = 1L, hi = 100L,
      lo_inclusive = TRUE, hi_inclusive = TRUE
    )
  ),
  birth_date = list(
    bounds = list(
      lo = as.Date("2001-01-01"),
      hi = as.Date("2019-12-31"),
      lo_inclusive = TRUE,
      hi_inclusive = TRUE
    )
  ),
  dg_age = list(bounds = age_bounds),
  ex_age = list(bounds = age_bounds),
  age_group = list(
    # this is the joint category space of dg_age_group and ex_age_group.
    # ex_age_group cannot be lower than dg_age_group by definition!
    dt = data.table::data.table(
      dg_age_group = 1:18
    )[
      j = list(ex_age_group = .SD[["dg_age_group"]]:18),
      keyby = "dg_age_group",
      .SDcols = "dg_age_group"
    ]
  ),
  social_class = list(
    set = 0:3
  )
)
var_set_dt <- data.table::data.table(
  id = c("subject_id", "birth_date",
        "dg_age", "ex_age",
        "age_group",
        "social_class"),
  var_nm_set = list(
    "subject_id", "birth_date",
    "dg_age", "ex_age",
    c("dg_age_group", "ex_age_group"),
    "social_class"
  ),
  value_space = value_spaces
)
vardef <- vame::VariableMetadata(
  var_dt = var_dt,
  var_set_dt = var_set_dt
)

# producing and using stratum tables
sdt <- vardef@vame_category_space_dt(
  c("dg_age_group", "ex_age_group", "social_class")
)
print(sdt)
ndt <- dt[i = sdt, on = names(sdt), j = .N, keyby = .EACHI]
print(ndt)

# retrieving labels
ndt[, "social_class_label" := vardef@var_labels(ndt[["social_class"]])]

# writing assertions (checks) on function input data
my_fun_1 <- function(dataset) {
  vardef@dbc@assert_is_dataset(dataset)
  return(nrow(dataset))
}
my_fun_2 <- function(dg_age) {
  vardef@dbc@assert_is_var(dg_age, var_nm = "dg_age")
}
```

## TODO

### Priority: low

#### Type: feat

`vm@var_set_value_space_sample`:

The issue of dependent variables
appears in both `sampler` and `maker` objects. It could be argued that
they should be required to have the same set of dependent variables. This
would mean improving the corresponding assertion functions. Alternatively,
a new column `var_set_dt$dep_var_nm_set` or even `var_set_dt$dep_id_set`
could be implemented --- but currently `sampler` objects can also sample
independently, so implmenting e.g. `var_set_dt$dep_id_set` would require
that independent samplers can still work. Currently in 0.3.0.15 using
`dep_var_nm_set` in `sampler` causes `data` to be asserted to contain
such variables. Maybe an independent `sampler` would need to be marked
in a special way so that the `data` assertion is not performed.

Commit message:

docs: add a todo for using *_make in value_space eval

README.md, after:


<!-- generated by R package codedoc; do not modify! -->

# Package `vame`


`vame` makes it simpler to define and make use of metadata pertaining
to one more variables (e.g. a tabular dataset). It implements the
`VariableMetadata` class, which contains the metadata. The various metadata
are accessed using slot functions such as `vm@var_description_get`.

The `VariableMetadata` class is intended for storing metadata for which there
is "one right way". For instance, a variable has one correct description in
text. This philosophy excludes tasks such as creating a manual for a dataset,
which can take many forms.

<!-- badges: start -->
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/FinnishCancerRegistry/vame/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/FinnishCancerRegistry/vame/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
<!-- badges: end -->

# Recommended installation

```r
devtools::install_github(
  "FinnishCancerRegistry/vame",
  ref = readline("enter latest tag on github: ")
)
```

# Example of use

Suppose you have a tabular dataset. You have ID columns, stratifying columns
(e.g. demographical data), dates, what have you. `vame` makes it easy to
define what kind of data each column contains. For instance you can define
the precise set of category values that a categorical column can have.
Further, this package makes quick work of writing assertions on columns
or entire datasets, of producing stratum tables for the purpose of computing
statistics within each stratum, and retrieving labels for (e.g.
integer-valued) categorical variables.

Consider the following tiny dataset of child patients.

```r
dt <- data.table::data.table(
  subject_id = 1:3,
  birth_date = as.Date(c("2001-01-01", "2002-01-01", "2003-01-01")),
  dg_age = c(10.5, 15.2, 20.0),
  dg_age_group = 3:5,
  ex_age = c(21.0, 20.0, 19.0),
  ex_age_group = c(5L, 4L, 4L),
  social_class = c(0L, 0L, 1L)
)

# "type" is up to you. you may want to write code that takes type into account.
# however, type "categorical" is special: stratum tables and labels can
# be retrieved for categorical columns only.
age_group_labels <- data.table::data.table(
  value = 1:18,
  label = paste0(0:17 * 5, "-", c(1:17 * 5 - 1, 120))
)
var_dt <- data.table::data.table(
  var_nm = c("subject_id", "birth_date",
             "dg_age", "dg_age_group",
             "ex_age", "ex_age_group",
             "social_class"),
  class_set = list(
    "integer", "Date",
    "numeric", "integer",
    "numeric", "integer",
    "integer"
  ),
  type = c("id", "date",
            "duration", "categorical",
            "duration", "categorical",
            "categorical"),
  label_set = list(
    NULL, NULL,
    NULL, age_group_labels,
    NULL, age_group_labels,
    data.table::data.table(
      value = 0:3,
      label = c("student", "labourer", "professional", "entrepreneur")
    )
  )
)

age_bounds <- list(
  lo = 0.0, hi = 120.0,
  lo_inclusive = TRUE, hi_inclusive = FALSE
)
value_spaces <- list(
  # element names such as subject_id, birth_date not necessary ---
  # I used them for readability.
  subject_id = list(
    bounds = list(
      lo = 1L, hi = 100L,
      lo_inclusive = TRUE, hi_inclusive = TRUE
    )
  ),
  birth_date = list(
    bounds = list(
      lo = as.Date("2001-01-01"),
      hi = as.Date("2019-12-31"),
      lo_inclusive = TRUE,
      hi_inclusive = TRUE
    )
  ),
  dg_age = list(bounds = age_bounds),
  ex_age = list(bounds = age_bounds),
  age_group = list(
    # this is the joint category space of dg_age_group and ex_age_group.
    # ex_age_group cannot be lower than dg_age_group by definition!
    dt = data.table::data.table(
      dg_age_group = 1:18
    )[
      j = list(ex_age_group = .SD[["dg_age_group"]]:18),
      keyby = "dg_age_group",
      .SDcols = "dg_age_group"
    ]
  ),
  social_class = list(
    set = 0:3
  )
)
var_set_dt <- data.table::data.table(
  id = c("subject_id", "birth_date",
        "dg_age", "ex_age",
        "age_group",
        "social_class"),
  var_nm_set = list(
    "subject_id", "birth_date",
    "dg_age", "ex_age",
    c("dg_age_group", "ex_age_group"),
    "social_class"
  ),
  value_space = value_spaces
)
vardef <- vame::VariableMetadata(
  var_dt = var_dt,
  var_set_dt = var_set_dt
)

# producing and using stratum tables
sdt <- vardef@vame_category_space_dt(
  c("dg_age_group", "ex_age_group", "social_class")
)
print(sdt)
ndt <- dt[i = sdt, on = names(sdt), j = .N, keyby = .EACHI]
print(ndt)

# retrieving labels
ndt[, "social_class_label" := vardef@var_labels(ndt[["social_class"]])]

# writing assertions (checks) on function input data
my_fun_1 <- function(dataset) {
  vardef@dbc@assert_is_dataset(dataset)
  return(nrow(dataset))
}
my_fun_2 <- function(dg_age) {
  vardef@dbc@assert_is_var(dg_age, var_nm = "dg_age")
}
```

## TODO

### Priority: high

#### Type: feat

`vm@vame_category_space_dt`:

`vm@var_set_make` can be used in place of `vm@var_set_value_space_eval`
in the case of categorical variables when
multiple columns are requested AND the necessary data is available from
other value spaces. Currently in v0.3.0.16 it is necessary to have ALL
dependent variables in one `value_space` to show the dependency in the
output of at least `vm@vame_category_space_dt`.

Maybe there needs to be a smart system, or user-inputted system, of knowing
which variable sets depend on what other variable sets.
### Priority: low

#### Type: feat

`vm@var_set_value_space_sample`:

The issue of dependent variables
appears in both `sampler` and `maker` objects. It could be argued that
they should be required to have the same set of dependent variables. This
would mean improving the corresponding assertion functions. Alternatively,
a new column `var_set_dt$dep_var_nm_set` or even `var_set_dt$dep_id_set`
could be implemented --- but currently `sampler` objects can also sample
independently, so implmenting e.g. `var_set_dt$dep_id_set` would require
that independent samplers can still work. Currently in 0.3.0.15 using
`dep_var_nm_set` in `sampler` causes `data` to be asserted to contain
such variables. Maybe an independent `sampler` would need to be marked
in a special way so that the `data` assertion is not performed.
